Grace mercy and peace be unto you from our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
Feel join me in a word of prayer.
O God, heavenly Father, as we gather before you this night, we give thanks for the joy of this season and your son, Jesus Christ, who has come to be the light of the world.
We ask tonight that you would lead us to see him as the prophet, priest, and king who has come into this world and indeed into our lives.
Let us see him and welcome him.
and let us come and worship Him.
We pray in Jesus' name.
Amen.
The congregation may be seated.
It is good to hear the voices of some little ones here with us tonight.
Just a couple of years ago, it was my little ones making noise in church.
It's still possible that that could happen too.
Just this last week,
My family was joined to welcome a new baby, my brother and sister-law, Jacob and Sarah, welcomed home their first child.
A child is always a gift and a reminder of God's precious blessings of life and hope for the future we give thanks for the children in our midst, especially as we turn our attention tonight to the Christ child, to God's own son born into this world, born into our midst of the season of Advent, we've been invited to come and watch
and wait, being reminded to be patient for the coming of God's Son and the fulfillment of God's promises in Jesus, the one who has come and the one that we are promised will come again.
We can be reminded as well that he also came just as a child, as a baby, as an infant who also relied upon his own earthly parents to care for him.
He came in all humility
the salvation of the world coming in this humble way.
When we think of a new baby that is born, often we think of words like sweet and tender and mild and innocent.
Those words do apply for a while.
Our wife and I have welcomed home three babies over the last number of years.
And without fail as they grew up, just a little bit from infants onto toddlers, beginning to speak,
and going through the natural stages.
I can remember each one of them over the period of time as they grew, learning words that I'm not sure that we taught them.
Maybe we did without realizing it.
But words like mine.
And I don't want to.
And my personal favorite, first words I can remember Jude stringing together.
No dada.
Doesn't take long for us human beings.
to sort of stray from that veneer of sweet and innocent and mild.
Because we know that from early on, we have that inner desire.
There's that inner will within all of us that we end up, and we can try not to and learn to be careful about it, but we end up putting ourselves before anyone and anything else.
We recklessly know we give thanks tonight that that is not the case with Jesus, this child that we welcome.
The only child born whose innocence would remain true and whose desires were not for himself, who did not put himself first, but rather the needs of his people, the needs of a world he loved, the needs of people he created putting us first, being willing because of that love for us to be put himself into danger and peril.
So we welcome him again this season, the holy one, the righteous Lord, the wonderful counselor, the prince of peace.
I would invite you tonight for just these few minutes to consider as well that if we are really going to welcome him, we can only truly welcome him if we see him in three ways, three titles in addition to those that he has given, three titles and offices that he holds, prophet, priest, and king.
We often call him Jesus Christ.
And sometimes in our minds, the word Christ almost seems like a last name that we're giving to him.
But the word Christ is not a last name.
Rather, it's a title that is rightly given, which means in Greek, Christus, which is Messiah or anointed one.
The beginning of Matthew's gospel opens in this way.
The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ or Jesus Messiah, anointed one, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
In the Old Testament, there were three offices or positions which someone could hold wherein they would be anointed upon taking that position.
That anointing would come often with oil at the hands of someone else with a promise to serve faithfully and then a word of blessing from God, bringing them into that office, anointing them for it.
The three offices in the Old Testament that are anointed in that way are the offices of prophet, of priest,
and of king.
Now it's hard to believe, thinking about a child, a small infant born into this world.
These are the titles that Jesus does hold and would grow into.
So to consider them briefly each tonight, prophet.
A prophet is one who speaks the truth.
And in the Old Testament, a prophet is one who speaks the truth on God's behalf, coming to the people, especially the people who have forgotten
about the Lord their God.
People who have followed after their own desires, who have taken up other idols, who have chased after things of the world and the prophet comes speaking a word of truth and says, come back.
Return, turn around, remember the Lord your God who has done such great things for you, who has given you all that you have turned back to the Lord your God.
The challenge with the word of a prophet is that it can be hard for us to hear.
It's a word we don't necessarily want to hear.
When I got to my last congregation a number of years ago, as a fairly young pastor still, I decided that part of my ministry during the week, I started writing a midweek email devotional that went out to members of the congregation and it was a way to stay connected with people during the week and also share some news and announcements of the congregation.
So I began writing weekly a devotional that would go out in these emails and it went fairly well at first.
And I can remember a number of people coming and saying that they were thankful for what I had written and encouraging me in the process of writing.
There was one woman in the congregation, a retired teacher.
And she didn't say a whole lot at first, but that first year for Christmas, she gave me two books as presents.
The first one was called nitty gritty grammar.
A guide to clear communication.
And the second one was more nitty gritty grammar, another guy declared communication.
She was very kind and I understood exactly where she was coming from.
I knew what her heart was.
Her name is Karen.
And she was just there to, she was Karen before Karen was Karen.
She was there to truly encourage me.
And that's what she did in her own way, sometimes a little bit more forcefully, but she would read through.
And I knew what was happening for her.
Whenever I spelled a word wrong, whenever I rushed through a sentence, whenever there was a run-on sentence, whenever a comma was in the wrong spot, she would hang on that.
And it would be hard for her to get the rest of the message.
But again, a choice had to be made.
Would I receive her encouragement?
Or would I push back on it?
What I think to myself, well, what difference does it make?
It's not that big of a deal I can just keep doing what I'm doing.
Or should I slow down?
Should I realize where her words are coming from?
A bit of a prophetic and encouraging message.
You're making some mistakes that are unnecessary.
Take a bit more time, slow down.
You can do better at this and maybe occasionally consult a book.
This is the word of the prophet for us as well.
And God's word to us is that we are ultimately sinful people, broken people, people who do chase after our own inner desires, but we are invited to hear God's truth.
This was the purpose of the prophets through scripture to come to call people back with encouragement, with love, mercifully calling God's people back to him.
And now as Jesus comes, John chapter eight tells us, Jesus said to the Jews who had believed in him, if you abide in my word, you are truly my disciples.
And you will know the truth and the truth will set you free.
If you abide in my word, you are truly my disciples.
So as we see Jesus tonight, one, we see him as prophet, the truth of God embodied in a person come into the world where we receive him.
Second, he is a priest.
We give thanks to God for this.
The prophet comes and speaks truth.
He speaks to us.
But the priest comes and he speaks for us.
This is the job of the priest throughout Scripture.
The priest is the intercessor, the one who goes on behalf of the people who are fallen, who are not holy, and goes and mediates to the holy God, speaking the word of the people to the God and bringing prayers of mercy and compassion on behalf of the people.
give thanks for the priest, the one who went and made sacrifices for the people.
And this was the way that it played out in the Old Testament.
God was teaching his people that sin, selfish desire, chasing after our own pride, which brings harm to our neighbor and harm to the world and a broken relationship with our God.
God taught his people that that always results in death.
Sin always results in bloodshed and death, separation from God,
And the end, blood shed is the result.
But what God did for his people then was he allowed for sacrifices.
So the priest, on certain holy days of the year, and especially one holy day of the year, would take animals who would stand in the place of the people so that the people's blood wouldn't have to be shed so that they could go on with their lives and live in the presence of God.
The priest would take an animal of various different kinds, a sheep or a lamb, sometimes a cow or a bull.
And the priest would go into the temple, into the holy place, and would make a sacrifice on behalf of the people the animal would take the punishment of sin.
It's hard to believe, and I know that Mary and Joseph couldn't understand all of this at the beginning, but this is exactly why Christ came.
He becomes the priest for all, a priest higher than the high priest of the Old Testament.
A priest who would ultimately not give an animal but himself, a priest who would be broken, a priest who would willingly go to the cross that his blood would be shed, that he would be placed there, that he would become the sacrifice, finally, eternally, so that the people could be spared.
This is why he comes into the world.
In this way, we give thanks for the priest who comes as the intercessor for us, as the mediator who goes on our behalf to God.
But finally, he is also the king.
If Jesus had come and had taught and had worked miracles and had led his people to follow him and then had gone to the cross and sacrificed himself, that would have been so much.
That would have been a great example.
He would have taken our sins upon himself there, but if he had stayed on the cross, it would not have been everything, at least not everything that we need because there is one more.
There's one more deep,
need of our lives and that is to be able to overcome the greatest threat of all which is finally death itself.
Jesus didn't stay on the cross.
He rose on the third day from the grave to show that he has victory there as well, to show that he has power even over this greatest foe that we all face which is death.
I was saddened to read yesterday
a post written on social media by former U.S.
Senator from Nebraska, Ben Sasse.
He served from 2015 to 2023, and then served as the president of the University of Florida since retired from that post.
And he wrote on social media, this is a tough note to write, friends.
But since a bunch of you have started to suspect something I'll cut to the chase, last week I was diagnosed with metastasized stage four pancreatic cancer, and I am going to die.
Advanced pancreatic is nasty stuff.
It's a death sentence.
But I already had a death sentence before last week too.
We all do.
Now, share a little bit more of what he wrote in just a moment.
But this is the reality of the season.
I know this is heavy material for a Christmas Eve sermon because we are caught up in the season and all the joy that does come with the season
And especially when children are around the joy of their faces, the expectation, the looking forward, the time with family and the baking and the cooking and the eating too much and all of the things that we fit into this season.
And there is a joy.
But the reality of this world is that there is also a pain and a sadness and a difficulty and problems.
And while we may be able to step away from this, from those things for a little while and I hope and pray that we do and can,
We know that they are still not too far away.
Ben Sasse went to write on in his post, there's not a good time to tell your people that you're now marching to the beat of a faster drummer.
But the season of Advent isn't the worst.
As a Christian, the weeks running up to Christmas are a time to orient our hearts towards the hope of what is to come.
Not an abstract hope in fanciful human goodness, not hope in vague, hallmark, sappy spirituality, not a bootstrapped hope in our own strength.
What foolishness is the evaporating muscle that I once prided myself in.
Nope, we often lazily say hope when what we mean is optimism.
To be clear optimism is great, and it's absolutely necessary, but it's insufficient.
It's not the kind of thing that's gonna hold you up when you tell your daughters you're not going to be there to walk them down the aisle, nor telling your mom and pops that they're gonna bury their son.
But a life well lived demands more reality, stiffer stuff.
That's why during Advent, even while still walking in darkness, we shout our hope, often properly with a gravelly voice, soldiering through tears.
I'll have more to say, I'm not going down without a fight.
One sub-part of God's grace is found in the jaw-dropping advances science has made these past few years in immunotherapy and more.
Death and dying aren't the same.
The process of dying is still something to be lived.
We're zealously embracing a lot of gallows humor in our house, and I've pledged to do my part to run through the irreverent tape.
But for now as our family faces the reality of treatments, and more importantly as we celebrate Christmas, we wish you peace.
The people walking in darkness have seen a great light.
On those living in the land of deep darkness, a light has dawned for to us a sun is given."
Isaiah chapter 9.
I'm very sorry and saddened that Ben had to write these words, but I certainly couldn't have said it better.
The hope that we hold on to this season is not optimism, it is trust.
It's not an idea or a theory, but a person that we are meant to see
and to welcome and to know and to understand as prophet, as priest, and as king, the fullness of God come to dwell in a human person, the love of God come down to earth, to rescue us from that which holds us away from our God, rescuing us even from death itself.
So let us see him again this season.
Come and study and find him.
See his goodness, understand his mercy and his compassion.
See the ways that he's taken our sins upon his shoulders, that he willingly went to the cross to forgive our sins.
This is God's love revealed for us.
Our response is thankfulness and worship and sharing this good news of mercy with one another and seeking to live in his pattern throughout our lives.
Amen.
And once again, if you'll join me in a word of prayer,
Lord God, as we gather before you this evening, we give thanks for your mercies, which are new every day.
We know as well that during this season, though it is a season of joy and hope and light, we still carry with us the burden of the challenges of this world, be that sickness or grief or mourning or the knowledge of very real needs in the world around us, those who do not have enough in this life.
Lord, we place these things in your hands, and we ask that you would lead us once again to see your son, Jesus Christ, the very hope of the world, the light of our lives, the Savior who has come and who will come again.
Let us receive him this night as our prophet, our priest, and our king.
Amen.